Hi AMCN,

You guys have the best mag in the world. Been reading for decades. Keep it coming.

Read the Ed's Desk (4-17 Aug, 2022) with interest and an uncomfortable mix of exasperation, frustration and
bemusement. And you ended with a request for feedback - this is the shortened version.

Love my bikes. Currently on a GSXR 1000 and finding the level of tech "good". What that actually means is
that I haven't touched any of the settings that the bike offers since I bought her. That's 3000 kms of my
favourite twisties and regular sessions at the local track (Manfeild). The GSXR is an easy, friendly bike
that suffers my sub-standard inputs and turns them into quick laps and laughs. I suspect the tech has
saved me a few times - a backend "lose" that turned into an eyes-wide-open, power-on drift was a good one. I'm
old enough to know that I can't go out and repeat that on demand. So yeah, I like that tech.

My work is also techie. Decades of software. More relevant has been recent exposure to EVs and the increasing
level of tech in vehicles like a Tesla. A couple of roadies in a friends Model X were eye-opening. These
things go hard. That's a two tonne vehicle that punches out of turns and with zero noise. It's going to
be a strange transition from ICE to EV (quiet) but it seems inexorable and it's not like they don't come with
thrills.

Once you get past the seal-shredding performance you start looking into all the software features. Anyone that's
spent time in this space will know about stuff like "dog mode" and "joe mode". The first one might save your dog
on a hot day and the second one muffles all the software bleeps during a long, night drive.

I also got to try the self-driving capability. I started out wanting to be impressed and I was. It was happy
enough tooling down the straights and coped with a few bends. Then when we were approaching the next bend that
seemed the same as all the previous bends, my friend grabbed the steering wheel and said "oh, its not going
to do the right thing here. You gonna have to take over.". Turns out that in some situations the self-driving
radar detects armco and steers straight at it. That really sounded sub-optimal to me. Like who hands the
driving duties over to a friend that parks cars in the nearest guardrail? There was some spirited debate with
my friend over whether the self-driving feature should even exist - he'd paid for the "full" version and wasn't
keen on what I had to say. In its defense he said things like "it checks to see that the driver is keeping
their hands on the wheel. Every now and then it shakes the wheel and it uses the resistance to tell if
someone is there.". The last gem my friend passed on was that drivers in the US have figured out that they
can "beat" that regular checking. It turns out that an orange perched in the steering wheel has just the
right weight to satisfy the self-driving that you are still there. Which left me speechless.

Features like "joe mode" are just fluff to keep the attention on Teslas, and to provide a point of difference
to customers that need something to tell their friends. Anything that gives them a sense of "one-up-man-ship"
and therefore justifies their selection. It's the standard feature-race that has been going on since the
Model-T and before. With electronics and software it's just been exaggerated to mind-melting levels. This is
s***t that nobody needs but it seems impossible to break this feedback loop. If you don't add "joe mode"
or something equally banal to your product then you run the risk of falling behind. In a race that is
flawed and stupid.

More importantly, features like self-steering are irresponsibly dangerous. The last significant thing I've
heard out of self-driving research and development, is that we are a long way off. And that's being kind.
Leading researchers have made statements along the lines of "none of the current directions are going
anywhere". The dangerous bit is that people hear terms like "self-driving" and "AI" and think they are
well defined activites. We just need to write more software that models those defined activities. The
truth of it is that "self-driving" and "AI" are just concepts. We have spent decades working on the AI
concept and the best of us feel they can say that nobody knows how to do it. And nobody even has an
idea with legs.

There is bugger-all that I can do about things like the feature-race. Including deep-fake features like
self-steering just ramps up the consequences of that silly race. My silent protest is that I will never
by a bike with "self-steering" or "lane-assist". I prefer to take responsibility for what my bike (or car)
is doing on a public road. Most of the time that's a pleasure but even when it's just about getting from
A to B, I don't want to do anything that allows me to relax. And start think about anything other than keeping
the bike exactly where it should be.

For me technology has been a profession and a hobby. I still enjoy it and the GSXR ownership experience
has been a blast. None of that changes the fact that one day, on a long loop through some local mountain
ranges, I could be taken out by a Tesla being driven by an orange.

Scott






