Hi Anja,

This is a message to acknowledge the recent meetings. I feel fortunate that
Mia has the people, expertise and resources around her that I see each time
I come to Tauranga. It is the most reassuring thing happening in Mia's life
and a scenario that I am motivated to preserve.

It is also a message to explain my response to the latest initiative to
put Mia on medication - it might otherwise seem confusing given the positive
exchange we had at CAMHS.

The short version is that I see this as a repeat of something raised with
the psychiatrist (who may have been "Paul"), some time ago. There was a moment
of disappointment to see that its actually the same medication on offer. I
understand the enthusiasm evident in recent meetings. As a parent I would love
to ease the obvious suffering of my daughter. It's only several personal
experiences that have broadened my own opinions on psychoactive medications.
The desire to ease suffering should not be leveraged to make very risky
decisions. I have heard the analogies about "blunt instruments... years of
refinement" before. These are words of soothing rather than science. As the
person making the decision on behalf of Mia I need to discuss the side-effects
and hear about the results of studies.

I appreciate that you know this area far better than I and your detailed
and practical approach to Mia's support continues to keep me hopeful. If
you were interested in further discussion then I would be very keen but I
also assume this is in the domain of the psychiatrist.

The results from Mia's cognitive assessment were nice to hear. I would have
liked to see Mia's face light up and everything move forward with more
smiling and more checkboxes being ticked. Of course that wasnt what happened!

Hearing about high IQ and creativeness is great but these concepts are
about potential. For me the difficult issue with Mia is to get her used
to pushing herself. Until she can tackle issues such as personal presentation,
keeping active and regular classes, potential remains just that. Again, I
assume that you are thoroughly aware of all of this. I only state it here
to explain my own perhaps subdued responses.

Regards,
Scott







