Hi Kate,

Thanks for providing your contact details to Ardis.

Firstly, I am so sorry this has happened - to Simon, Ardis, yourself, family
and friends. Simon was not your average human being and I count myself
lucky that we were both picked up by the same employer, several decades
ago. His family and friends spoke perfectly about the nature of the man.
It was loving affirmation of my own experiences.

We met at a small, dodgy software company in the 80s. The owner was the
dodgy part. We were a small team of techies that beavered away trying to
deliver on the owners grandiose promises. Simon somehow had the ear of the boss.
Back then I thought that was surprising, given Simon's own techie background and
casual presentation. The boss was all Porsches and cuff-links, while
Simon had an old Rover with bad electrics. Somehow the door locks were
connected to the revs of the engine. As you accelerated away from an
intersection all the door locks would start thrashing up and down, in sync
with the revs. I though it was the most outrageously funny thing while
Simon just dipped his head and chatted about the awesomeness of other
parts of the car.

It took a couple of years of working at that company before he offhandedly
mentioned that he was a dad. It wasnt that being a dad belonged in a throwaway
comment, rather it was something important to him - a forever thing, that he
held solid views about.

We were all stunned - still in our 20s and children were for far more mature
types than we modeled ourselves on. I think I might have teased him a bit.
Simon took the teasing and he never showed anything other than a quiet
commitment. Even at that age he had the personal strength and intellect to
debate something as tricky as being a dad. He talked about efforts to get
back to the UK - to visit when he could.

Now that lovely person has gone and the child has to make the trek, from
the far side of the world. There is a beauty somewhere in all of that but
truly feeling it would take a spiritual purity that I dont have. It just
seems unfair and proper sad.

I hope I made your Dad laugh a few times and maybe I said a few things that
added to his own thoughts. He certainly did that for me.

Arohanui to Simon and yourself.

Scott










