Hi all,

I was staring into the dark out the window of the plane. It had been a long, night-time flight and I was
keen for the dawn. The sky was definitely getting lighter, up ahead. There was land and an airport
done there somewhere.

We were over the upper, central part of Australia. It was flat and soft reddish brown and it was also
big. I watched it pass by below for two hours before anything really changed - a clutch of isolated buildings
and then more barren red-ness. Then another group of buildings before finally the change of colour to the
green of some hardy vegetation. That two hours of flying at 900kph stretched across 1800km, something like
the length of New Zealand. Australia is really big and the middle bit is really empty.

When Australia first emerged from the dark I thought I was looking down at a vast river system. Like
the braided rivers we have on the Canterbury plains and I think I've seen similar images from Alaska. Many
tributaries leading to bigger and bigger streams that eventually lead to the river, which forges on to
some sea in the remote distance. Except upper, central Australia is not covered in braided river systems so
what the hell was this?

It took a little amateur sleuthing to figure out that these were ancient, dried-up water courses. For a
short time I imagined that the presence and flow of water was a seasonal thing - monsoonal. But there was
absolutely nothing growing down there. With a reliable, if periodic, supply of water there would be trees,
bushes, grass, maybe even people. There was no hint of any of that. These were patterns written into the
land over a different time-scale. 

There are two places in the world that have really, really old rocks - Canada and Australia. These rocks
(well, in Australia's case its the mineral zircon) are so bloody old they simply couldnt be much older,
cos they are nearly as old as the Earth itself. Yeah, that old. We are talking about rocks and minerals that
were formed not long after the birth of the universe. The zircon crystals from North-West Australia are
4.4 billion years old. That's a silly length of time. If I compared it to the length of my flight, i.e. the
universe was created at the moment of takeoff and now (2018) was the moment of landing, then us humans
stood up on the plains of Africa a fraction of a second before touchdown. We poke our heads up just in
time to get bowled. The land I was looking at from out of my window would consider us inconsequential, a
momentary flutter at the edge of its perception.

In truth, it was unlikely I was looking at anything that old simply because I dont know where the plane
was, but the thought stuck with me. I toyed with the idea that there were parts of the scene below that
had never felt the compression of a human foot, or any kind of foot. The thought seemed entirely reasonable
given the scale of what I had been looking at and the lack of the necessities for life down there. Shit,
this place was way past unfriendly. Even at 10km up it grilled my eyes.

My flight had started in Cochin, India. I thought about the population density and the lushness that I had
left behind. There were 1.4 billion people back there. They live closely and work the land hard. They can
squeeze 3 crops of rice a year out of those paddies. I'm guessing that's not entirely natural - only made
possible by big irrigation schemes such as at Aleppy, Kerala.

We were on a houseboat on the backwaters of Aleppy. Mosquitoes had ruled the previous evening. We had
started with stout intentions of watching the sunset from the upper deck, but ended up bailing to our
rooms early. The local blood-suckers were punching their XXL, military-grade probes through our clothes.

I had a good sleep but was awake early. I hoped the morning chill might keep the mosquitoes subdued
and shifted quietly to the upper deck. The view was postcard, exotic India. The backwaters stretched
out into a heavy morning gloom. Local custom has fires burning much of the time. The smoke blankets
the areas around villages and it also seemed to escape out over the backwaters. The smell of the smoke
is part of the strangeness, but also completely belongs.

Fisherman in solo canoes slipped by. It was still dark. Eventually I could hear the Moslem call to
prayer from a nearby village, the wailing, meandering notes distorted by the distance. The first motorized
transport showed up - small ferries carrying workers to their jobs. The noise was a gross disturbance.
Life on this planet pre-industrial would have been easier on the ears and all the more peaceful for it.

The boat staff were next. Feet on floors, doors opening and closing and using the backwater as their
toilet. Whether they knew I was on the upper deck or not, or whether that knowledge would have made
any difference I don't know. I had long since abandoned the judgement response - it comes from a
different framework for living and is automatically irrelevant. It's also damn tiring getting wound
up about irrelevances 20 times a day.

Our houseboat had pushed its bow up onto a bank and between a couple of convenient palms. A few
ropes had then been enough to keep us secured for the night. At the top of the small bank was a
footpath that followed the shore in either direction, and beyond that was a row of homes. Just in
front of us was a small building that looked like one of the ubiquitous road-side stalls. One side
of that building was window-less and appeared to be separated from the rest of the space by an internal
block wall. Where a door would have provided access to the footpath there were large boards, giving
the dusty, utilitarian box an abandoned look. I was slightly unsettled when the boards moved and were
set aside so that an old man could step out onto the walkway. The abandoned concrete box was a home.

He was some age beyond 80 and it was showing. His legs were skinny and bowed possibly enough to be
a symptom of rickets. The skin on his skinny legs was also not right - bad enough to make me wince
and look elsewhere. I watched his face for a while but there was no opportunity to share a good-
morning nod. He chomped away at his empty gums vigorously. They were either really tasty or there
was something a bit mad about the man.

I was interested but feeling like I was intruding. The old boy had just woken up and was going
through his own morning routine - it was a private moment but I was an involuntary voyeur. The
internal conflict eased as he ambled around picking up rubbish, sweeping leaves and talking to
people that passed by. He went and collected a set of clothes from one of the houses and laid
them out on his bed. Then he smoothly crossed the footpath and using the sides of the boat as a
handrail, lowered himself into the water for his morning bath.

Right around the moment when I recovered my breath he surfaced, and squeezed a fine jet
of water from his mouth. It was obviously an enjoyable part of his day. The thought of dipping
my own toe in that same water was nauseating. But there he was at 80+ giving his immune
system another thorough workout. Obviously the routine had given him the constitution of an ox.
I will pass away in another few decades from some insipid, western ailment and this guy will still
be porpoising around between the houseboats of Kerala. 

My introduction to India had been the old part of Cochin city - Fort Cochin. We spent a few days
settling into the new place, culture and timezone. For a few reasons it did not turn out to be a good
introduction - most of that not the fault of Fort Cochin - and when we left for Trivandrum we were
headed for something that I hoped would be happier.

The state capital of Trivandrum seemed a lot like Cochin. A style of city was becoming apparent.
The strongest aspects to that were religion and culture but there were more unexpected aspects
such as the alcohol ban. The policy makers of Kerala have come down so hard on the consumption
of alcohol that there did not seem to be any of those city zones devoted to food and booze, that we
were used to. Certainly not in the style that we had found in every South-East Asian country where
they are quite happy to pander to the indulgences of western tourists. Kerala has several progressive
social policies that give results such as 97% literacy. Good old NZ cant boast anything similar.
It would be interesting to find out what the absence of alcohol has done for the people of
Kerala.

In the meantime that lack of a food+booze zone meant that we had landed in another city that was
not geared to make life easy for a visiting westerner. There were no places where westerners
congregated for food, beer and entertainment. There were no places where you might strike up a
conversation with another traveller or a local guy that has been motivated to learn English and
wants to share some tales. We were adrift in a city devoted to being exactly what it wanted to
be. There was no real basis to be surprised but the experience was isolating.

The hotel was clean and modern. We heaved an internal sigh of relief and settled in for a quiet
evening. There was room-service, a TV and with good wifi I had Netflix running on that TV
without much hassle. We had started a new series and we were in a mood to binge to the end
of the season. The noise and culture of India outside our window could wait until the morning.

We had not reached the end of the first episode before a loud voice started up outside our
window. I mean loud like a public address system at a Metallica concert. We looked at each
other a bit bemused. I went over to the window and looked out. There was a building a bit
shorter than ours. I could look down on the roof and see a lone guy with a microphone and
stacks of electrical equipment. Between passionate rants he played equally passionate Hindi-
pop to the entire neighbourhood. I could only assume that the unseen audience was happy
with this because nobody appeared to throw him off the building.

It was so loud that TV viewing was impossible. I grumbled. I fretted and grumbled so more.
To my surprise Sue came out in support of the guy - "This is wild India, Scott", "Go with
it for once", "Just take it in". She was actually smiling and with some mental gymnastics
I was able to see the absurd side of it. Why on Earth would you fly to a place like India
and get upset about not being able to watch Netflix. She was right.

We listened to the free, local entertainment and chatted about things until it finally
closed down, somewhere in the small hours. The next day was Sunday and we had no duties and
no plans. The mood was sleepy and positive.

Our rooftop DJ started again at 5:30am the next morning. This was ridiculous enough that I
was immediately laughing. I looked over to see a completely unimpressed Sue. For a second
I thought she was playing to the moment. But the jerky movements and the stiff back quickly
set me straight. The positive attitude to local cultural performances had waned overnight.
I might have said something limp and moderating but it went unacknowledged. The bedclothes
were swept aside and Sue was throwing on an outfit before I had really accepted the fact
that she was truly pissed. She said things like "This is totally unacceptable", "I will have
to speak to the manager". She was so bent about it she wasnt really even talking to me, but
rather fuelling the coming conflict. She strode out the door - I thought - looking a
picture of female righteousness and power. It was much later that she mentioned the fact
her outfit had been inside-out.

Sue negotiated a move to a room around the next side of the building. Our DJ continued
unabated 90 degrees to our left. The change of room worked like magic. The noise
was ignorable, or it added a musical element to the background noise of the city, depending
on your mood.

Early in the evening of the same day, the DJ, all his gear and some freshly acquired
hangers-on relocated to the lane under our window.



Captain watching soapies. Old man behaving like a porpoise where capt had just done a piss. Aleppy.

Dog found its own corner of the world. Trivandrum.

Girl/boy preening on Marissa beach (its a 10, truly, at the very least, <quiet sob>)

Girls/boys surfing. Welligama.

Sue and wild india.

Looking out at the wide, unaltered spaces of central Australia I thought it had dodged a bullet and was
all the more beautiful for it.

What do we do with all that natural wealth? Feed ourselves, shelter ourselves and a whole bunch of fun
stuff related to keeping the species alive. Lastly, we entertain ourselves.

